The Economic and Social Impacts of Ride-sharing Platforms 

Ride-sharing platforms are often conceptualized as two-sided platform-mediated business networks, that is, as economic platforms with two distinct user groups that use the ridesharing company’s technology and protocols to interact with each other and share significant cross-side network effects. The latter suggests that the value of the platform to both user groups increases with the number of users in the other group who affiliate with the platform. However, an oft-ignored difference between ridesharing platforms and other two-sided business networks is that ridesharing platforms, in addition to increasing the private value of the two sides of the platform through traditional demand-supply economics, also impact social value by drawing from and contributing to the quality of urban mobility experienced by citizens other than the platform’s riders and driving partners in the regions in which they are operational.  In this study, we would like to assess this social impact of ridesharing platforms, in addition to their economic impact, and comment on implications thereof for regulatory policy.

The evidence on the social impact of ride-sharing platforms, notably, quality of urban mobility is inconclusive. One the one hand, through its value proposition of convenient and inexpensive rides, Uber brings non-driving trips effected through walking, low-speed vehicles, auto rickshaws and public transport into the ambit of driving trips. In turn, Uber could potentially increase consumer surplus but also, pressure on public infrastructure to increase congestion rates. On the other hand, emergent research suggests that ride-sharing platforms have the potential to decrease congestion in many ways – increased capacity utilization (in terms of both higher faction of time and higher share of miles having fare-paying passengers) relative to traditional taxis and therefore, lesser time spent in acquiring customers; dynamic pricing strategies that have the potential to delay or divert peak hour demand; and increased vehicle occupancy levels because of pooling drivers who would have otherwise made trips in private, single occupancy cars or taxis. All of these effects decrease fuel consumption and vehicle miles.

Specifically we propose to evaluate the impact of ride sharing platforms on the following-

1.	Private car ownership: It has been widely claimed that app based taxi services can prove to be a convenient and affordable alternative to private car ownership. Increasing private car ownership is associated with multiple issues, both at the macro level (congestion, pollution, parking space shortage etc.) as well as at the micro level (maintenance hassles, costs etc.). Former Uber CEO Travis Kalanick has set an ambitious goal to end private car ownership altogether. We propose to evaluate the impact on car ownership by looking at data on car sales by category (commercial/ non-commercial, light/ heavy etc.). Specifically, we plan to look at the temporal variation in the number of cars sold in each of these categories as well as the number of applications for driving licenses. If available, we wish to look at the number of bank loan applications for cars, across categories. In the absence of exogenous shocks like changes in the regulatory or economic conditions, it would be fair to relate these variations to the increasing availability of ride sharing services.

2.	Complementarity with public transport: In order to assess the impact of app based taxi services on urban mobility in India, an important question which needs to be answered is whether they are being used to substitute or complement public transport services like metros, buses, autos etc. This is a crucial question, which can help assess whether ride sharing services have had a positive or detrimental effect on the quality of urban mobility. We propose to look at the number of pickups/ drops made at important hubs like metro stations, bus terminals etc, and also the number of rides made in the late night and early morning hours, when public transport services are not available. We also plan to use data on ridership in public transport systems like metro, buses etc (if available; an alternative is to estimate these figures based on the number of trains/ buses running in the city) and see how these have changed over the time when ride sharing services came into prominence. 

3.	Effect of pooling services on congestion: Ride sharing platforms have been unabashed in making claims on the impact of pooling rides on congestion and pollution. However a lot of these involve oversimplification and assumptions, which call for an objective evaluation. Using a combination of empirical and analytical modeling, we plan to study whether pooling of rides leads to lesser cars on the road translating to a better quality of urban mobility. The answer to this question will be driven in part by the second question on complementarity with public transport.  If it turns out that pooled rides are being used largely by those who would have otherwise used more optimal services like buses/ metros, then the impact on congestion may be negative. We will be focusing on the impact mainly during commute hours, as that’s when congestion is most common, and least welcome.  We propose to extrapolate these results to study the impact of incentivizing private ride sharing on the quality of urban mobility. 

We propose to restrict the scope of this study to a couple of cities initially, for a period of about 4-5 years. Illustrative data requirements include:

1.	Session level data from the Uber app- A recent study has concluded that the UberX service generated $6.8 billion worth of consumer surplus in the United States in 2015. We plan to replicate this study in the Indian context. To this end, we will be needing session level data, a session being defined as an instance when a user searches for a ride on Uber, including those which don’t lead to a ride request. For each session we will be needing the surge price, the underlying surge generator (which is hidden from the customer), geographical area as defined by Uber, date and time, anonymised user ID, expected wait time prediction, ride type and the final decision whether to request a car.  These will be used to estimate the demand curve, followed by the consumer surplus generated.

2.	Uber trip logs- For all sessions which lead to a successful ride request, we will be needing the date and time, source and destination (both geocoded as well as Uber defined), anonymised rider and driver ID, ride type, fare, surge, trip time, ride distance and the distance and time taken to reach the pickup point. These will be used to evaluate Uber’s complementarity to public transport, and by extension, its effect on congestion. 

3.	Traffic data on travel time indices, commuter stress indices, hours of delay, congestion costs, excess fuel consumed due to congestion, etc. These are standard measures of traffic congestion that are available in typical urban mobility reports. However, they may not be available in the Indian context and may require other data sources such as Google Traffic, crowdsourcing platforms like Waze or local transportation authorities.

The above data, in conjunction with exogenous shocks such as shutting down of Uber for a specific time period due to regulatory issues or driver agitations will help us causally identify the impact of the platform on quality of urban mobility.

Of course, addressing this question would require a deeper understanding of the data that are currently available in this regard. We could complement any proprietary data that Uber has with data from public sources to answer this question. In the past, research on urban mobility in India has been constrained by lack of data. We hope this study will address this gap to advance our in understanding of the costs and benefits of the ride sharing industry in India, specifically in terms of parameters of social value. 

